# 2.2 IOS Navigation

## 2.2.1 Primary Command Modes

As a security feature, the Cisco IOS software separates management access into the following two command modes:
- **User EXEC Mode** - This mode has limited capabilities but is useful for basic operations. It allows only a limited number of basic monitoring commands but does not allow the execution of any commands that might change the configuration of the device. The user EXEC mode is identified by the CLI prompt that ends with the `>` symbol.
- **Privileged EXEC Mode** - To execute configuration commands, a network administrator must access privileged EXEC mode. Higher configuration modes, like global configuration mode, can only be reached from privileged EXEC mode. The privileged EXEC mode can be identified by the prompt ending with the `#` symbol.

## 2.2.2 Configuration Mode and Subconfiguration Modes

To configure the device, the user must enter global configuration mode, which is commonly called global config mode.

From global config mode, CLI configuration changes are made that affect the operation of the device as a whole. Global configuration mode is identified by a prompt that ends with `(config)#` after the device name, such as `Switch(config)#`.

Global configuration mode is accessed before other specific configuration modes. From global config mode, the user can enter different subconfiguration modes. Each of these modes allows the configuration of a particular part or function of the IOS device. Two common subconfiguration modes include:
- **Line Configuration Mode** - Used to configure console, SSH, Telnet, or AUX access.
- **Interface Configuration Mode** - Used to configure a switch port or router network interface.

When the CLI is used, the mode is identified by the command-line prompt that is unique to that mode. By default, every prompt begins with the device name. Following the name, the remainder of the prompt indicates the mode. 

For example, the default prompt for line configuration mode is `Switch(config-line)#` and the default prompt for interface configuration mode is `Switch(config-if)#`.

## 2.2.3 Video - IOS CLI Primary Command Modes

You can click on any device such as PC-PT and click Desktop, click Okay then you get CLI for the device.

By default there is `Switch>` which indicates the User EXEC Mode.

```
Switch>
```

To getting the Privileged EXEC Mode, type `enable` and then you are in this mode with `Switch#` showing in the terminal:

```
Switch> enable
Switch#
```

To get to the Global config mode, type `configure terminal` to configure the device:

```
Switch# configure terminal
Switch(config)#
```

There are many subconfiguration modes in Global config mode, let's say for getting in Interface Configuration Mode:

```
Switch(config)# interface vlan 1
Switch(config-if)#
```

## 2.2.4 Navigate Between IOS Modes

Various commands are used to move in and out of command prompts. 

To move from user EXEC mode to privileged EXEC mode, use the `enable` command. Use the `disable` privileged EXEC mode command to return to user EXEC mode.

**Note**: Privileged EXEC mode is sometimes called enable mode.

To move in and out of global configuration mode, use the `configure terminal` privileged EXEC mode command. To return to the privileged EXEC mode, enter the `exit` global config mode command.

There are many different subconfiguration modes. For example, to enter line subconfiguration mode, you use the `line` command followed by the management line type and number you wish to access. Use the `exit` command to exit a subconfiguration mode and return to global configuration mode.

```
Switch(config)# line console 0
Switch(config-line)# exit
Switch(config)#
```

To move from any subconfiguration mode of the global configuration mode to the mode one step above it in the hierarchy of modes, enter the `exit` command.

To move from any subconfiguration mode to the privileged EXEC mode, enter the `end` command or enter the key combination Ctrl+Z.

```
Switch(config-line)# end
Switch#
```

You can also move directly from one subconfiguration mode to another. Notice how after selecting an interface, the command prompt changes from `(config-line)#` to `(config-if)#`.

```
Switch(config-line)# interface FastEthernet 0/1
Switch(config-if)#
```

## 2.2.5 Video - Navigate Between IOS Modes

The PC is connected to the switch by console mode so we start by default mode which is User EXEC Mode:

```
Switch>
```

To get to the privileged EXEC mode from User EXEC Mode:

```
Switch> enable
Switch#
```

To return back to the User EXEC Mode from privileged EXEC Mode:

```
Switch# disable
Switch>
```

Inorder to configure the device, we need to get to the Global config mode:

```
Switch# configure terminal
Switch(config)#
```

**Note**: we can use `configure t` for short for `configure terminal`

To get back to the Privileged EXEC Mode from Global config mode:

```
Switch(config)# exit
Switch#
```

If we enter `exit` again then we lose connection to the device, we need to enter again to get the default `Switch>` prompt of User EXEC Mode.

To get into one of the subconfiguration mode like for console port you need line subconfiguration mode:

```
Switch(config)# line console 0
Switch(config-line)#
```

You can write exit to get back to the Global Config Mode:

```
Switch(config-line)# exit
Switch(config)#
```

To get to the Virtual Terminal Management Interfaces (subconfiguration mode), used for remote administrative access to the switch:

```
Switch(config)# line vty 0 15
Switch(config-line)#
```

**Note**: Virtual Terminal Config mode is part of Line Config mode as it configures the Virtual Terminal Lines (Telnet\SSH)

We can move directly to one subconfiguration mode to another, for instance for moving from Line Configuration mode to Interface Configuration Mode:

```
Switch(config-line)# interface vlan 1
Switch(config-if)#
```

And also from Interface Config Mode to Line Config Mode:

```
Switch(config-if)# line console 0
Switch(config-line)#
```

We can use other interfaces too such as Fast Ethernet:

```
Switch(config-if)# interface fastethernet 0/1
Switch(config-if)#
```

As there are no errors, this indicates that we are now configuring Fast Ethernet 0/1 (Slot 0, Port 1).

To exit all of the Subconfig modes and Global config mode, in other words to get back to the Privileged EXEC Mode from Subconfiguration mode:

```
Switch(config-line)# end
Switch#
```

**Note**: You need to press enter for getting `Switch#`

You can use Ctrl + Z to get back to the Privileged EXEC Mode directly.

You can also use end to get back to Privileged EXEC Mode from Global Config Mode:

```
Switch(config)# end
Switch#
```

## 2.2.6 A Note About Syntax Checker Activities

When you are learning how to modify device configurations, you might want to start in a safe, non-production environment before trying it on real equipment. NetAcad gives you different simulation tools to help build your configuration and troubleshooting skills. 

One such tool is the Syntax Checker. In each Syntax Checker, you are given a set of instructions to enter a specific set of commands. You cannot progress in Syntax Checker unless the exact and full command is entered as specified. 

More advanced simulation tools, such as Packet Tracer, let you enter abbreviated commands, much as you would do on real equipment.
