# 2.5 Save Configurations

## 2.5.1 Configuration Files

This topic will show you how to save your configurations.

There are two system files that store the device configuration:
1. `startup-config` - This is the saved configuration file that is stored in NVRAM. It contains all the commands that will be used by the device upon startup or reboot. Flash does not lose its contents when the device is powered off.
2. `running-config` - This is stored in Random Access Memory (RAM). It reflects the current configuration. Modifying a running configuration affects the operation of a Cisco device immediately. RAM is volatile memory. It loses all of its content when the device is powered off or restarted.

The `show running-config` privileged EXEC mode command is used to view the running config. 

As shown in the example, the command will list the complete configuration currently stored in RAM:

```
Sw-Floor-1# show running-config
Building configuration...
Current configuration : 1351 bytes
!
! Last configuration change at 00:01:20 UTC Mon Mar 1 1993
!
version 15.0
no service pad
service timestamps debug datetime msec
service timestamps log datetime msec
service password-encryption
!
hostname Sw-Floor-1
!
(output omitted)
```

To view the startup configuration file, use the `show startup-config` privileged EXEC command.

If power to the device is lost, or if the device is restarted, all configuration changes will be lost unless they have been saved. 

To save changes made to the running configuration to the startup configuration file, use the `copy running-config startup-config` privileged EXEC mode command.

## 2.5.2 Alter the Running Configuration

